== RFC 005: Reference pathways ==
This RFC describes the plan for periodically updating pathways on WikiPathways that were automatically converted from an external data source ((KEGG, Reactome, inter-species). Since any pathway on WikiPathways is inherently unstable (meaning it's content will be changed by users), it is necessary to design a mechanism that allows for merging incremental updates (when the original datasource is updated) into the unstable version on WikiPathways.

Note (TK, April 2008): We decided that reference pathways are not required to make incremental updates of converted pathway content possible. Because reference pathways would only introduce extra complexity, the rest of this RFC will outline Alex's idea for a workflow without reference pathways. Older versions of this RFC containing the implementation plan for reference pathways can still be viewed in the svn history.

The following is a summary from wikipathway-dev thread: http://groups.google.com/group/wikipathways-dev/browse_thread/thread/f9c0509b8a85020b

== Workflow ==
Converted pathways are uploaded to the wiki. Users can edit the pathways, like any other pathway on the wiki. Once an update for the converted pathway becomes available, two thinks can happen:
1. The pathway wasn't edited. It's the same as the original converted pathway and can be overwritten with the new converted version.
2. The pathway was edited. The user is notified that an update from the original datasource is avaliable (via the curation tag mechanism). A curation tag is added, with a link to a merge tool that shows the diff between the original converted and updated converted pathway. Using the merge tool, the user can merge the changes into the edited pathway and mark it as merged.
This process is repeated when a new update of the converted pathway becomes available.

== Implementation ==
We need to implement:
1. A server-side tool that:
- Converts pathway from an external data source
- Initally uploads converted pathways to the wiki
- Performs the following actions when an update of the external data source is available:
	- check whether an uploaded pathway has been changed on the wiki by a user
	- either overwrite the uploaded pathway or add a curation tag with link to mergetool

2. A merge tool that shows a diff between two pathways and allows the user to merge these changes into another pathway. This can simply be a page with the diff applet and the editor applet below each other. Future versions can include semi-automatic merging.

Note that both tools can be implemented independent of the WikiPathways code.
